docs: Deploy App Workloads with a PCG Tutorial - DOC-1004 (#2353)
spectrocloud/librarium: docs/docs-content/clusters/pcg/deploy-app-pcg.md

Reviewer: We have two validate sections. Let's just do the validation at the end, with the deployed app.

Author: I removed the first **Validate** section, but I kept the PCG status verification as this is required for the cluster deployment step.

---
sidebar_label: "Deploy App Workloads with a PCG"
title: "Deploy App Workloads with a PCG"
description:
  "Learn how to deploy a Private Cloud Gateway (PCG) to connect your data center or private cloud environment to
  Palette. This tutorial teaches you how to launch a PCG, create a data center cluster, and deploy a demo application."
hide_table_of_contents: false
toc_min_heading_level: 2
toc_max_heading_level: 2
sidebar_position: 50
tags: ["pcg"]
---

Palette Private Cloud Gateway (PCG) is a crucial infrastructure support component that acts as a bridge between your
private cloud environment or data center and Palette.

A PCG is required in environments lacking direct network access to Palette. For example, many infrastructure
environments reside within private networks that restrict external connections, preventing Palette from reaching them.

> Upon installation, the PCG acts as an endpoint, enabling Palette to securely deploy and delete Kubernetes clusters

Reviewer: To Adelina's point, I think what we are missing the statement that explains that the PCG initaties a connection from inside the private network to Palette. The PCG polls Palette for instructions and when it's instructed to add or remove a cluster it does the work. Once the cluster is up, the PCG is no longer used as the cluster communicates directly with Palette (again initiating the connection to Palette).

> Upon installation, the PCG acts as an endpoint, enabling Palette to securely deploy and delete Kubernetes clusters

Author: Got it! I rewrote the paragraph and provided more information.

within your private cloud environment or data center. Refer to the [PCG Architecture](./architecture.md) section for
more information.

> Typically, a PCG is used with Palette SaaS and self-hosted Palette instances that do not have direct access to the

Author: I removed the System PCG paragraph after Karl's suggestion. :)

target environment. However, a System Private Gateway is recommended when direct network connectivity is available.

> Visit the [System Private Gateway](./architecture.md#system-private-gateway) section to learn more.

Author: I agree. Done!

A PCG comprises a cluster of nodes and can be deployed by two methods. These include using the
[Palette CLI](./deploy-pcg/) for VMware vSphere, MAAS, or OpenStack environments, or deploying it
[manually onto an existing Kubernetes cluster](./deploy-pcg-k8s.md).

In this tutorial, you will deploy a VMware PCG using Palette CLI. Next, you will learn how to deploy a VMware cluster
with a sample Kubernetes application called

> [Hello Universe](https://github.com/spectrocloud/hello-universe#hello-universe), utilizing either Palette or Terraform.

Reviewer 2: Just clearing up with the dashboard as both really utilise Palette.

[`palette login`](../../palette-cli/commands/login.md) command.

In your terminal, execute the following command.

```bash
palette login
```

Once issued, you will be prompted for several parameters to complete the authentication. The table below outlines the
required parameters along with the values that will be utilized in this tutorial. If a parameter is specific to your
environment and Palette account, such as your Palette API key, ensure to input the value according to your environment.
Access the [Deploy a PCG to VMware vSphere](../pcg/deploy-pcg/vmware.md) guide for detailed information about each
option.

| **Parameter**                  | **Value**                                                                                                        | **Environment-Specific** |
| ------------------------------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
| **Spectro Cloud Console**      | `https://console.spectrocloud.com`. If using a self-hosted instance of Palette, enter the URL for that instance. | No                       |

> | **Allow Insecure Connection**  | `Y`                                                                                                              | No                       |

Author: Added a lil note :)

| **Spectro Cloud API Key**      | Enter your Palette API Key.                                                                                      | Yes                      |
| **Spectro Cloud Organization** | Select your Palette Organization name.                                                                           | Yes                      |
| **Spectro Cloud Project**      | `None (TenantAdmin)`                                                                                             | No                       |

> | **Acknowledge**                | `Y`                                                                                                              | No                       |

Author: :white_check_mark: :)

After accepting the login banner message, you will receive the following output confirming you have successfull
authentication with Palette.

```text hideClipboard
Welcome to Spectro Cloud Palette
```

The video below demonstrates Palette's authentication process. Ensure you utilize values appropriate for your
environment.

> <Video title="palette-login-video" src="/videos/palette-login.mp4"></Video>

Reviewer 2: This video displays `cardenas88karl-gmail` can we get some blurring on it?

Author: Using the prod-automation account still displays `cardenas88karl-gmail` when selecting the org.
![CleanShot 2024-03-13 at 10 17 39](https://github.com/spectrocloud/librarium/assets/63267693/d424b703-6cb5-4efa-9c26-6f430bea0e2d)
I increased the playback speed and used the stage account instead. What do you think?

   | -------------------- | --------- | ------------------------ |
   | **Patch OS on boot** | `N`       | No                       |

7. **vSphere Machine Configuration**

   Set the size of the PCG as small (**S**) as this PCG will not be used in production environments.

   | **Parameter** | **Value**                                     | **Environment-Specific** |
   | ------------- | --------------------------------------------- | ------------------------ |
   | **S**         | `4 CPU, 4 GB of Memory, and 60 GB of Storage` | No                       |

8. **Node Affinity Configuration Information**

   Set **Node Affinity** to `N`, indicating no affinity between Palette pods and control plane nodes.

   | **Parameter**     | **Value** | **Environment-Specific** |
   | ----------------- | --------- | ------------------------ |
   | **Node Affinity** | `N`       | No                       |

After answering the prompts of the `pcg install` command, a new PCG configuration file is generated, and its location is
displayed on the console.

```text hideClipboard
==== PCG config saved ==== Location: /home/ubuntu/.palette/pcg/pcg-20240306182821/pcg.yaml
```

> Next, Palette CLI will create a local kind cluster that will be used to bootstrap the PCG cluster deployment in your

Reviewer 2: Can we put a link to https://kind.sigs.k8s.io/ to put the word kind into perspective?

Author: Yes!

VMware environment. Once installed, the PCG registers itself with Palette and creates a VMware cloud account with the
same name as the PCG.

The following recording demonstrates the `pcg install` command with the `--config-only` flag. When using this flag, a
configuration file named **pcg.yaml** is created under the path **.palette/pcg**. You can then utilize this file to

> install a PCG with predefined values using the command `pcg install` with the `--config-file` flag. Refer to the

Reviewer 2: Perhaps a sentence that this provides a reusable PCG installation mind be good?

Author: :white_check_mark:

[Palette CLI PCG Command](../../palette-cli/commands/pcg.md) page for further information about the command.

> <Video title="palette-pcg-config-only" src="/videos/palette-pcg.mp4"></Video>

Reviewer 2: This video shows `sp-carolina` and `spectrocloud.dev`. Perhaps blur?

Author: The playback speed was increased and the recording now is under 1 min :)

<br />
<br />

> You can monitor the PCG cluster creation by logging into Palette, switching to the **Tenan Admin** scope, clicking on

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can monitor the PCG cluster creation by logging into Palette, switching to the **Tenant Admin** scope, clicking on
```

> **Tenant Settings** from the left **Main Menu**, then selecting **Private Cloud Gateways** from the left **Tenant

Reviewer 2: This is getting a bit confusing as you are clicking on different things in one sentence. Can we break this up in separate sentences?

Author: :white_check_mark:

Settings Menu**. Click on the PCG cluster you just deployed to access its **Overview** page and check the deployment
progress under the **Events** tab.

![PCG Events page.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_pcg-events.png)

> Additionally, you can observe the PCG deployment progress from your terminal. Upon completion, the local kind cluster is

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can also follow along with the PCG deployment progress from your terminal. Upon completion, the local kind cluster is
```

automatically deleted from your machine.

![Palette CLI PCG deployment](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_pcg-cli.png)

> 

Author: :white_check_mark:

### Validate

Log in to Palette as a tenant admin, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings**. Next, click on
**Private Cloud Gateways** from the **Tenant Settings Menu** and check if the PCG you created is listed. Click on your
PCG and confirm that its cluster status is **Running** and **Healthy**.

![PCG Overview page.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_pcg-health.png)

## Create a Cluster Profile and Deploy a Cluster

Once you have successfully deployed the PCG, proceed to create a cluster profile with the
[Hello Universe](hhttps://github.com/spectrocloud/hello-universe) application and use it to deploy a VMware cluster.

> This tutorial offers two different workflows: one utilizing the Palette User Interface (UI) and the other employing

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
You can use the Palette dashboard or 
```

load-balancer implementation for your Kubernetes cluster, as VMware does not offer a load balancer solution natively.
The load balancer is required to help the _LoadBalancer_ service specified in the Hello Universe application manifest
obtain an IP address, so that you can access the application on your browser.

| Pack Name       | Version | Layer         |
| --------------- | ------- | ------------- |
| lb-metallb-helm | 0.13.x  | Load Balancer |

Now, under **Pack Details**, click on **Values** and replace the predefined `192.168.10.0/24` IP CIDR listed below the
**addresses** line with a valid IP address or IP range from your VMware environment to be assigned to your load
balancer. Next, click **Confirm & Create** to add the MetalLB pack.

![Metallb Helm-based pack.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_metallb-pack.png)

Finally, click again on the **Add New Pack** button to add the Hello Universe pack.

| Pack Name      | Version | Layer       |
| -------------- | ------- | ----------- |
| hello-universe | 1.1.x   | App Service |

Click on the **Confirm & Create** button and then click **Next**.

**Review**

> Review the selected cluster layers and configurations. If everything looks correct, click on **Finish Configuration** to

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Review the selected cluster layers and configurations. Click on **Finish Configuration** to
```

complete the cluster profile creation.

![Cluster profile review page.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_cluster-profile.png)

> ### Deploy a VMware Cluster

Reviewer 2: I wonder if this entire deployment flow should be included in this tutorial or if we should defer to another deploy a cluster page https://docs.spectrocloud.com/clusters/data-center/vmware#deploy-a-vmware-cluster

Navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Profiles**. Locate and click on the cluster profile you previously

> created. Next, click on the **Deploy** button and confirm by clicking **OK** to initiate the cluster deployment using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
created. Next, click on the **Deploy** button and confirm by clicking **OK** to start the cluster deployment using
```

section.

**Nodes Configuration**

Provide the details for the nodes of the control plane and worker pools.

| **Field**                   | **Control Plane Pool** | **Worker Pool** |
| --------------------------- | ---------------------- | --------------- |
| Node pool name              | control-plane-pool     | worker-pool     |
| Number of nodes in the pool | `1`                    | `1`             |
| Allow worker capability     | No                     | Not applicable  |
| Enable Autoscaler           | Not applicable         | No              |
| Rolling update              | Not applicable         | Expand First    |

Keep the **Cloud Configuration** settings the same for both pools, with **CPU** set to 4 cores, **memory** allocated at
8 GB, and **disk** space at 60 GB. Next, populate the **Compute cluster**, **Resource Pool**, **Datastore**, and
**Network** fields according to your VMware vSphere environment. Click **Next** to proceed.

**Settings**

The **Settings** section offers advanced options for OS patching, scheduled scans, scheduled backups, and cluster role
binding. Utilize the default values, and click on the **Validate** button.

**Review**

> The **Review** section allows you to review the cluster configuration before deploying the cluster. If everything is
> correct, click on **Finish Configuration** to start the cluster deployment, which may take up to 20 minutes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The **Review** section allows you to review the cluster configuration before deploying the cluster. Click on **Finish Configuration** to start the cluster deployment, which may take up to 20 minutes.
```
Let's assume it's correct, that way we can shorten the sentence.

Now, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**. While the deployment is in progress, Palette displays
the cluster status as **Provisioning**. You can view detailed cluster information, including deployment status and event
logs, by selecting your cluster.

![Palette's Clusters page.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_cluster-provisioning.png)

</TabItem>

<TabItem label="Terraform Workflow" value="Terraform_Workflow">

### Set Up the Tutorial Environment

Open a terminal window and clone the Spectro Cloud [Tutorials](https://github.com/spectrocloud/tutorials) repository
from GitHub using the command below.

```bash
git clone https://github.com/spectrocloud/tutorials.git
```

Navigate to the **/terraform/vmware-cluster-deployment-tf** directory, which contains the Terraform code for this
tutorial.

```bash
cd terraform/vmware-cluster-deployment-tf
```

Next, copy your Palette API key and export it as an environment variable with the command below. Replace
`YourAPIKeyHere` with your API key.

```bash
export SPECTROCLOUD_APIKEY=YourAPIKeyHere
```

### Create a Cluster Profile and Deploy a VMware Cluster

> Before proceeding, we suggest that you explore all the Terraform files present in the directory. Below is a high-level

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before proceeding, we recommend that you explore all the Terraform files present in the directory. Below is a high-level
```

  | `folder_name`        | Provide the name of the vSphere folder to target when deploying the VMware cluster.                         | Yes      |
  | `search_domain`      | Provide the name of the network search domain of your vSphere environment. For example, `spectrocloud.dev`. | Yes      |
  | `vsphere_cluster`    | Provide the vSphere compute cluster to use for the VMware cluster deployment.                               | Yes      |
  | `datastore_name`     | Provide the vSphere datastore name to use for the VMware cluster deployment.                                | Yes      |
  | `network_name`       | Provide the vSphere network name to use for the VMware cluster deployment.                                  | Yes      |
  | `resource_pool_name` | Provide the vSphere resource pool to target when deploying the VMware cluster.                              | Yes      |
  | `ssh_key`            | Provide the path to your public SSH key. If not provided, a new key pair will be created.                   | No       |
  | `ssh_key_private`    | Provide the path to your private SSH key. If not provided, a new key pair will be created.                  | No       |

> When you are ready making the required changes, initialize Terraform with the command presented below.

Reviewer: We need to make it clearer that the user needs to update the tfvars. We could add that as a paragraph before the current sentence or however you want to make that clear. But keeping that guidance in the bullet for tfvars is not ideal as some will skip reading those bullets.

Author: Excellent point!

```bash
terraform init
```

The `init` command will download the plugins and providers defined in the **provider.tf** file.

Next, issue the `terraform plan` command to preview the resources that Terraform will create.

```bash
terraform plan
```

> The output displays the resources that Terraform will create in an actual implementation, including the cluster profile,
> VMware vSphere cluster, and a new SSH key pair if the keys were not provided.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The output displays the resources that Terraform will create in an actual implementation, including the cluster profile,
VMware vSphere cluster, and a new SSH key pair unless an existing key pair was specified.
```

```text hideClipboard

> # Output condensed for readability

Reviewer 2: I've not seen these lines in any of our tutorials.

Reviewer: It's not something we have formalized or standardized on but it's out there.

Plan: 5 to add, 0 to change, 0 to destroy.
```

Issue the `terraform apply` command to deploy the resources to your VMware vSphere environment.

```bash
terraform apply -auto-approve
```

It can take up to 20 minutes to complete the cluster deployment process. Once completed, the following output will be
displayed.

```text hideClipboard
# Output condensed for readability
Apply complete! Resources: 5 added, 0 to changed, 0 to destroyed.
```

> Now, log in to Palette, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and click on **Clusters**. While the deployment is in

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Log in to Palette, navigate to the left **Main Menu**, and click on **Clusters**. While the deployment is in
```

progress, Palette displays the cluster status as **Provisioning**.

![Palette's Clusters page.](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_cluster-provisioning.png)

> You can select the `pcg-tutorial-cluster` to explore deployment status and event logs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can select the **pcg-tutorial-cluster** to explore deployment status and event logs.
```
Switching to bold as it's a UI element.

</TabItem>

</Tabs>

## Validate

Once the cluster creation process has finished, log in to Palette, navigate to the left **Main Menu**, and click on

> **Clusters**. Select the `pcg-tutorial-cluster` to display the cluster's **Overview** page. Once the cluster status

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Clusters**. Select the **pcg-tutorial-cluster** to display the cluster's **Overview** page. Once the cluster status
```

### Delete the PCG

After deleting your VMware cluster and cluster profile, proceed with the PCG deletion. Log in to Palette as a tenant
admin, navigate to the left **Main Menu** and select **Tenant Settings**. Next, from the **Tenant Settings Menu**, click
on **Private Cloud Gateways**. Identify the PCG you want to delete, click on the **Three-Dot Menu** at the end of the
PCG row, and select **Delete**. Click **OK** to confirm the PCG deletion.

![Delete PCG image](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_pcg-delete.png)

Palette will delete the PCG and the Palette services deployed on the PCG node. However, the underlying infrastructure
resources, such as the virtual machine, must be removed manually from VMware vSphere.

Log in to your VMware vSphere server and select the VM representing the PCG node named `gateway-tutorial-cp`. Click on
the **Three-Dot Actions** button, select **Power**, and **Power Off** to power off the machine. Once the machine is
powered off, click on the **Three-Dot Actions** button again and select **Delete from Disk** to remove the machine from
your VMware vSphere environment.

![Delete VMware VM](/clusters_pcg_deploy-app-pcg_vmware-delete.png)

## Wrap-Up

> In this tutorial, you learned how to deploy a VMware PCG using Palette CLI and utilize it to deploy a Palette cluster

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned how to deploy a VMware PCG using Palette CLI.  Then, you used the PCG to deploy a Palette cluster
```

with a sample Kubernetes application to your VMware vSphere environment. Next, you accessed the Hello Universe
application landing page through the exposed service URL.

A PCG is a powerful component that enables Palette to communicate with private clouds or data center environments that
impose restrictions on external connections. With a PCG, you can deploy Palette clusters in environments such as VMware

> vSphere, while also providing lifecycle support and monitoring for your clusters.

Reviewer: We should reinforce at the end that the PCG supports using Palette in restricted networks that don't allow inbound connectives from the outside. The PCG acts as the endpoint due to it's design as the source and polls Palette for instructions.  This is how we uses can use Palette without having to worry about making scary firewall rules or exposes public endpoints.

Author: I rewrote the paragraph :)

| **Spectro Cloud Organization** | Select your Palette Organization name.                                                                                                                                                                                                                               | Yes                      |
| **Spectro Cloud Project**      | `None (TenantAdmin)`                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 | No                       |
| **Acknowledge**                | Accept the login banner message. [Login banner](../../tenant-settings/login-banner.md) messages are only displayed if the tenant admin enabled a login banner.                                                                                                       | Yes                      |

After accepting the login banner message, you will receive the following output confirming you have successfully
authenticated with Palette.

```text hideClipboard
Welcome to Spectro Cloud Palette
```

> The video below demonstrates Palette's authentication process. Ensure you utilize values specific to your environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The video below demonstrates Palette's authentication process. Ensure you utilize values specific to your environment, such as the correct Palette URL. Contact your Palette administrator for the correct URL if you use a self-hosted Palette or VerteX instance. 
```
Thoughts on making the URL part a bit clearer?

Author: I liked it :)

## Wrap-Up

> In this tutorial, you learned how to deploy a VMware PCG using Palette CLI. Then, you used the PCG to support the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial, you learned how to deploy a VMware PCG using the Palette CLI. Then, you used the PCG to support the
```

> deployment of a Palette cluster with a sample Kubernetes application to your VMware vSphere environment. Next, you

Reviewer: ```suggestion
deployment of a Kubernetes cluster with a sample application to your VMware vSphere environment. Next, you
```

Removing the term "Palette cluster" as we are deploying a Kubernetes cluster. And the application is just a regular application :)
